RASPBERRY PI AND ESP32: HOW THIS PROJECT WORKS

1. WHAT THE SYSTEM DOES

The Raspberry Pi looks at pictures from a USB camera and checks for five types
of road features. It sends the detected class signals through a USB cable to
the ESP32. The ESP32 receives those signals and provides a place for your
machine-control functions to run.

The complete path is:

USB camera -> Raspberry Pi -> YOLO model -> class signals -> USB cable
           -> ESP32 -> your control functions -> actuator drivers -> machine

The vision and communication parts are implemented. The actual decisions about
motors, steering, braking, and other hardware is for Cornelius to implement.
Currently, receiving a pothole signal does not automatically apply a brake.


2. WHAT EACH DEVICE DOES

The Raspberry Pi:
  - Reads the USB camera.
  - Resizes and prepares each picture for the model.
  - Runs the trained yolo11n.onnx model on its CPU.
  - Reads predicted classes, confidence scores, and boxes around objects.
  - Filters weak predictions and overlapping duplicate boxes.
  - Checks that a class is confirmed and the result is recent enough.
  - Sends the current class signals to the ESP32.
  - Checks that the ESP32 replies.
  - Can show the annotated picture or optionally record a video.

The ESP32:
  - Does not run the vision model or receive camera pictures.
  - Receives small text messages from the Pi.
  - Checks that each message is complete, valid, and from the current connection.
  - Extracts the class signals and passes them to handleClassSignals().
  - Replies to confirm that the message was accepted.
  - Clears requests if the messages expire.
  - Will operate the actual hardware once your control functions are connected.

No Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, MQTT broker, or internet service is used for this link.


3. THE IMPORTANT FILES

main.py
  The complete camera-to-ESP application. This is the normal entry point.
  It runs without a screen unless --show-window is supplied.

yolo11n.onnx
  The current trained model used by the application. It recognises the five
  road classes listed below. Its input is one 640 x 640 RGB image, normalised
  to values between 0 and 1. The program handles that preparation.

esp/road_actuation/road_actuation.ino
  The firmware to upload to the ESP32 using Arduino IDE.
  This contains the communication code and your integration function.

HEADLESS.md
  Detailed installation, protocol, and bench-test instructions.

4. WHICH SIGNAL MEANS WHICH CLASS

The Pi sends one number called a mask. Think of it as five on/off switches
packed into one number. Each class has a different value:

  Class                    Bit position    Value
  cracks                   0               1
  speed_bumps              1               2
  potholes                 2               4
  left_road_boundaries      3               8
  right_road_boundaries     4               16

To describe several classes together, their values are added:

  0  = no active class requests
  1  = cracks
  4  = potholes
  5  = cracks AND potholes (1 + 4)
  24 = left AND right road boundaries (8 + 16)
  31 = all five classes (1 + 2 + 4 + 8 + 16)

This number is NOT a speed, distance, angle, severity level, or object count.
Two potholes still produce the pothole bit, not a count of two.

The mask uses this fixed order even if a compatible model stores its class IDs
in a different order. The Pi maps model class names to the correct signal bits.

Only the class mask is sent. Bounding boxes and confidence values stay on the
Pi. If machine control needs object location, distance, or left/right position
within the picture, the communication protocol must be extended first.


5. HOW THE USB COMMUNICATION WORKS

Connections:
  Plug the USB camera into the Pi.
  Connect the ESP32 to another Pi USB port with a USB DATA cable.
  A charge-only cable cannot carry these messages.

Port selection:
  The ESP usually appears as /dev/ttyUSB0 or /dev/ttyACM0.
  main.py selects a single connected USB serial device automatically.
  If more than one exists, use --serial-port with the actual ESP device.
  Automatic selection does not prove a device is an ESP: the handshake does.

Serial settings:
  115200 baud, 8 data bits, no parity, 1 stop bit, no flow control.
  Both the Python code and firmware already use these settings.

Starting the connection:
  1. The Pi opens the serial port and waits about two seconds because opening
     the port can reset some ESP32 boards.
  2. The Pi sends HELLO with a new connection identifier.
  3. The ESP clears its class requests and replies READY with the same identifier.
  4. The Pi sends a zero state and waits for confirmation.
  5. Camera processing and regular class-state messages begin.

During operation:
  A separate Python thread handles serial communication so the camera loop does
  not wait directly for every reply. It sends the latest state, waits for its
  acknowledgement, then waits about 100 ms before sending again.

  This is at most roughly ten updates per second and can be slower because of
  reply time and system load. It does not mean the model processes ten pictures
  per second. The same recent detection state may be sent several times.

  The thread keeps only the latest state, not a queue of old detections.
  Repeating a state does not give its source image a new lifetime: the remaining
  time decreases until the next fresh image result arrives.


6. THE ACTUAL MESSAGE FORMAT

Every message is a line of plain text. Its structure is:

  message-body*checksum followed by a newline

The checksum is four hexadecimal characters. It helps detect damaged messages.
It is called CRC-16/CCITT-FALSE: polynomial 0x1021, initial value 0xFFFF,
no reflection, no final XOR. It covers only the message-body bytes.
It is an error check, not encryption or authentication.

The following examples show only the message bodies. The real code adds the
checksum and newline automatically; do not send these bare examples as packets.

  Pi sends:    HELLO,0123456789abcdef
  ESP replies: READY,0123456789abcdef

  Pi sends:    STATE,0123456789abcdef,7,5,900
  ESP replies: ACK,0123456789abcdef,7,5

Meaning of the STATE example:
  STATE             = this message contains the current class signals
  0123456789abcdef  = identifier for this connection
  7                 = message sequence number
  5                 = cracks and potholes are active
  900               = requests expire after 900 ms from ESP acceptance

The connection identifier is 16 lowercase hexadecimal characters. Each state
message has a higher sequence number than the previous one. The ESP rejects
wrong identifiers, repeated/older sequence numbers, bad checksums, invalid masks,
and lifetimes outside 100 to 5000 ms. Invalid packets do not refresh expiry.

ACK means the ESP accepted the state and the callback returned. It does NOT
mean a motor moved, a brake engaged, or an actuator reached its target. Physical
completion feedback would need additional sensors and response messages.


7. HOW TO ADD THE MACHINE CONTROL

Open esp/road_actuation/road_actuation.ino and find:

  void handleClassSignals(uint8_t mask)

This is the integration point. The serial parser already calls it with a valid
mask. Your partner does not need to rewrite the parser to receive class signals.

Inside that function, each class can be read as a true/false value:

  bool cracksDetected        = (mask & 1) != 0;
  bool speedBumpDetected     = (mask & 2) != 0;
  bool potholeDetected       = (mask & 4) != 0;
  bool leftBoundaryDetected  = (mask & 8) != 0;
  bool rightBoundaryDetected = (mask & 16) != 0;

The '&' checks whether that particular class switch is on.
Pass those values to your own control functions or store them for the main
ESP loop to use. Decide how simultaneous classes affect each other; the current
communication code does not assign priority to any class.

IMPORTANT ABOUT THE CURRENT CALLBACK:
  OUTPUTS_ENABLED is false, and every CLASS_PINS entry is -1.
  Communication and acknowledgements still work, but no GPIO outputs are driven.

  The existing line "if (!OUTPUTS_ENABLED) return;" exits the callback early.
  If you add your own control logic after this line, it will not run while the
  flag is false. Put your integration before that return, or deliberately replace
  the optional GPIO example with your own implementation.

Optional simple digital-output approach:
  If one on/off GPIO per class suits the hardware, assign the five CLASS_PINS,
  set ACTIVE_HIGH appropriately for each driver, then set OUTPUTS_ENABLED true
  and upload the firmware again. HIGH/LOW outputs alone do not provide a full
  speed or steering controller. Use suitable actuator drivers, not GPIO pins
  directly connected to motors.

Repeated messages:
  The callback runs for every accepted state, even if the mask has not changed.
  A persistent pothole signal should not unintentionally restart a one-shot
  action ten times per second. If an action should happen only when a class first
  appears, compare the current mask with a stored previous mask.

Keep the callback quick:
  Do not use long delay() calls or wait in a loop for a motor movement to finish.
  Store the requested action and let the regular ESP loop advance it using
  timers or a state machine. Otherwise serial processing and the expiry check
  cannot run promptly.

Define what zero means:
  mask == 0 clears all class requests. It can mean no detected classes, stale
  vision, startup, shutdown, or communication expiry. It does NOT prove that
  the road is clear. The current callback interface does not distinguish these
  causes. If your controller needs that distinction, extend the interface.

  You must define the appropriate hardware response to cleared
  requests. The name safeStop() currently means "clear the class requests";
  it cannot physically stop a machine until the actuator logic implements that.


8. WHAT HAPPENS IF SOMETHING FAILS

Camera read fails:
  The Pi publishes zero, attempts to clear ESP requests, and stops the application.

Vision becomes slow or gets stuck:
  The serial thread will stop refreshing the old class state once its original
  lifetime expires. The ESP also has its own local expiry timer.

USB cable disconnects or Python crashes:
  The ESP clears requests when the last accepted state's lifetime runs out,
  provided the firmware loop is still running. The USB connection may also be
  supplying the ESP's power; unplugging it can power the ESP off instead. Actual
  driver behaviour on loss of power must be considered in the hardware design.

Serial write or acknowledgement fails:
  Writes and ACK waits each have a one-second limit. The Pi stops the runner
  and attempts a final zero state. It does not automatically reconnect or replay
  failed active commands. Restarting establishes a new connection identifier.

Q, Esc, Ctrl+C, or normal shutdown:
  Q/Esc work when the preview is enabled; Ctrl+C works in the terminal. The Pi
  attempts to clear requests before releasing the camera and video resources.
  These actions may wait for a currently running inference to finish. The ESP's
  local expiry still limits how long a previous request is held.

The expiry timer is a software check in loop(), not an independent hardware
emergency-stop system. Blocking or broken actuator code can stop it from running.


9. HOW TO START IT

First upload esp/road_actuation/road_actuation.ino using Arduino IDE, selecting
the actual ESP32 board and USB port. On boards with native USB and a separate
USB-UART connector, Serial must be configured for the connector you actually use.
See HEADLESS.md for the USB CDC setup notes.

Close Arduino Serial Monitor before starting the Pi program, because Python
needs the same serial port. Activate the prepared Python camera environment,
then enter the project folder:

  cd ~/bumblebee

Normal headless operation (no display):

  python main.py

Preview for a communication-only bench test with a longer allowed lifetime:

  python main.py --show-window --ttl-ms 5000 --confirm-frames 1

Choose a specific ESP and camera:

  python main.py --serial-port /dev/ttyUSB0 --usb-index 0

Use the real ESP port; /dev/ttyUSB0 is just an example. A stable
/dev/serial/by-id/... path can also be supplied.

Other useful options:
  --conf 0.3              Minimum model confidence; current default is 0.3.
  --inference-threads 2   CPU threads for inference; current default is 2.
  --output recording.avi Save annotated video; no recording by default.
  --model other.onnx     Use a different compatible five-class road model.

Command-line changes apply only to that run. Running plain "python main.py"
again returns to the defaults, including 1500 ms lifetime and two-frame
confirmation. --show-window needs a desktop session and GUI-enabled OpenCV.
The headless OpenCV package cannot create a preview window.


10. HOW TO TEST AND READ THE RESULTS

Test vision alone, with every class eligible regardless of confidence:

  python test_onnx.py --show-window --conf 0.0 --frames 0

This runs continuously until stopped. It does not connect to the ESP or send
actuation requests. It draws the top 20 candidates by score, without NMS, and
saves latest.jpg and scores.jsonl in a timestamped folder under onnx_tests/.
Zero confidence includes unreliable predictions; boxes alone do not establish
that a detection is correct. The explicit --conf 0.0 overrides the test script's
current 0.2 default.

Test a known road image without a screen:

  python test_onnx.py --source road.jpg --conf 0.0

Test communication alone:
  HEADLESS.md includes a "Communication-only bench check" that sends each class
  separately, then all classes, then zero. Use this to verify your callback
  without relying on the camera to detect anything. It sends actual requests,
  so use the communication-only firmware or a suitable bench arrangement.

Useful log messages:
  "ESP connected"       = handshake and initial zero-state ACK succeeded.
  "detected=..."        = class predictions remaining after confidence filtering
                          and postprocessing, before freshness/confirmation.
  "state=expired"       = that frame is too old to drive class signals.
  "mask=0"              = no active requests, for any of the reasons above.
  "Class outputs: ..."  = the Pi's requested class state changed; this is not
                          proof of physical actuator movement.
  "Write timeout"       = host USB write stalled, not a missing vision detection.
  "did not acknowledge" = expected matching ESP reply was not received in time.

If there are no detections, test a clear known-positive road image first.
Check raw scores with test_onnx.py before changing the ESP code. If communication
fails even in the bench test, investigate the USB link and firmware separately.


11. CURRENT HANDOFF STATUS

Implemented:
  USB camera acquisition, YOLO11 ONNX inference, five-class signalling, optional
  preview/recording, serial handshake, packet checksums, acknowledgements,
  sequence checking, and request expiry.

Still the partner's responsibility:
  Actuator wiring, GPIO choices, motor/steering/braking functions, priority when
  multiple classes appear, response to cleared requests, and physical feedback
  if acknowledgement of actual movement is needed.

The YOLO11 export passed graph validation and numerical comparison with the
original checkpoint. Software tests also cover the protocol and several failure
paths. These checks do not certify detection accuracy or physical machine
behaviour. Confirm those using appropriate road images and the actual hardware.
